Kinosakionsen

Kinosaki is a special place.  It’s one of those that stands out as incomparable.  Not even in the running for favorite place ever because it cannot be compared.

Kinosaki is an onsen town.  Supposedly, the town’s history as an onsen started in 717AD, when a Buddhist priest, received a vision that told him to pray for the health of the local people for 1000 days.  After much hard work, a hot spring erupted.  I think the town has seen a cycle of redevelopment, or two, since then; but the point remains.  Kinosaki has a very traditional feel to it.

Now, as an aside, I hate tourism experiences that take some aspect of real historical culture and turn it into some modern, commercial shit-show (I’m looking at Siem Reap/Angkor Wat here).  Kinosaki’s raison d’être is tourism, but it’s a very real thing here.  During a weekend, one can see hundreds, perhaps thousands, of people enjoying the bath houses, the sweets shops, and the beer taps.  But it’s really a thing to do for Japanese people, and it’s nothing new.  It’s a genuine Japanese experience without that hint of fakeness one gets in some western-adapted Asian tourism hot-spots.

It’s likely that you’ll get to Kinosakionsen Station via an “Express” train from Kyoto, Osaka, Kobe or Himeji.  The train ride is quite pleasant, and provides a chance to cut across Honshu and get a cross section of the island.

When you step out of the train station, it hits you.  The classically Japanese square, which is equally modern and traditional, leads you naturally down the street, towards the main strips.  STOP!  As soon as you get out of the train station doors, go right.  This is one of the most popular bath houses in town.  There’s a foot bath and ramada, which leads to the lobby.  Here’s some advice - the hours on this place are more limited than the other bath houses, and the daily side-swap is between Roman and Japanese style, so make an effort to get to this.

Across the street from the train station is the tourist information center, which as usual, is quite helpful if not particularly English-literate.  There’s a service to drop your luggage off and have it delivered to your room in your Ryokan (see if yours participates, not all do).  If you want to stroll around before dragging your luggage to your lodging (or are just here for the day, or are heading out…) there’s some coin lockers right outside the front of the station.

If you follow the main road towards the river, you’ll see plenty of restaurants, cafes and markets.  I feel confident saying that any one would be great, but in particular, there’s a Jazz cafe and a place called (maybe) Narita Coffee.  Both are a little ways down the block, and both are fantastic.  That being said, I’m nearly certain that any place you stop at will be fantastic.

This road, the road on either side of the river, and a small area near the junction between the two comprise the town.  It’s quite easy to walk from end to end in 10-15 minutes, and it’s pretty flat.  The traffic is minimal and used to dodging tourists.  It may be more difficult stumbling around in the wooden clog-sandals you may be tempted to wear, like everyone decked out in onsen-wear.

It seems that most of the Ryokan are on the north side of the river, and generally upstream from the tracks.  The bath houses, restaurants and bars are all distributed throughout the town, and the whole place is immaculate.

There’s seven bath houses in town, I managed to visit 4.  I particularly like rotenburo, the outdoor hot spring baths, so my adventure focused on those.  The two best, in my not so humble opinion, were Kouno-yu and Goshono-Yu.  Kouno-yu was notable for the intricacy of the landscaping and the rock work in the pool, while Goshono-Yu was spectacular with the hot waterfall, especially the left pool with its special lounge rock.  Mandara-Yu is a bit tough to find, and definitely small.  But it’s worth checking out just because the approach is pretty neat and the style is quite nice.

