Tokyo Station (and Japan Rail)

Tokyo Station is the epicenter of long-distance, passenger rail travel in Japan.  It is not the most heavily trafficked station in Japan, that honor goes to Shinjuku Station, but it does sport the highest number of trains-per-day (over 3000).  Tokyo Station is the center of the Shinkansen Network, as well as a major connection point for a number of inter-city rail lines.  Most of Japan’s famous “Bullet Trains” either start or terminate at the Tokyo Terminal (as it is called in the on-train announcement as one rolls in).

As is classic for a Japanese train station, Tokyo station is equally mall and transport hub, with a mind-boggling network of walkways leading to various places, all lined with shops and eateries.  Among the unique attractions at Tokyo Station are the Tokyo Ramen Street, with 8 popular ramen shops represented (though there’s only one that always has a line), and Ekiben-ya Matsuri, a “celebration” of ekiben offering 170 varieties from all over Japan.

One thing about busy Japanese train stations: prepare to face torrents of humanity rushing in waves on well-known paths.  For the ambling, aimless traveler, it can be quite a challenge to navigate through, rivaling some of the most torrential vehicle traffic in the world.

It is truly a wonder to spend some time on the upper-level platform, watching the Shinkansen roll in and out.  The high-pitched electric whine, and the quick but effortless acceleration to considerable speed in the platform area are quite mesmerizing indeed.  The operators have a special window in the cabs along the train that allow them to peer out alongside the train as it moves through the station, ostensibly for safety purposes.

If you plan to pass through Tokyo Station, plan on spending some time.  It’s possible to make a quick connection here, especially from the Narita Express to a Shinkansen… but why?  There’s a great food court offering a wide array of choices, such as yakitori, sushi, tempura, breads and sweets on “Central Street” (a shopping area convenient to the core of the station), and you’ll need some time to navigate through Ekiben-ya Matsuri to collect a nice cache of bento and munchies for your trip.  There’s plenty of beer to choose from, plus at least one high-class liquor store selling sake and who knows what else.

If you’re somewhere outside the Ginza/Imperial Palace district and looking to catch a Shinkansen but in a hurry, it is often more convenient to hop on at Ueno (northbound) or Shinagawa (southbound).  Shinagawa also has the convenience of being quite convenient to Haneda Airport.  It’s also a single train on the Narita Express to Tokyo, but it takes significantly longer and is also much more expensive (on the order of $30US one-way on N’EX and more like $6 from Shinagawa to Haneda on a much simpler train).