Tokyo Arrival

For nearly all foreign visitors, Tokyo will be the first stop in Japan.  Tokyo is the beating heart of the nation, so while it represents a compact microcosm of the essence of Japan, it is also a world apart from even Osaka or Sapporo.  In fact, in Japanese terms, Tokyo isn’t even a city; it’s a special beast even by their own standards.

The airports (Narita and Haneda) are standard international affairs.  The smart way to get into town is via train, but of course bus and auto are also options.  Regardless of which airport you fly into, your first destination is Shinjuku.  Shinjuku Station (or rather the agglomeration of stations for a number of different rail operations) is the busiest rail station in the world, and is also high in the running for most overwhelming places to drop into.

You see, if you take the Narita Express, you ride on a nice, comfortable and modern train, peaceful music plays, and it’s probably less than half full.  You step out into a maze of platforms, escalators and the human torrent going in every direction.

Be prepared for the fact that you have no idea where you’re going, but every person around you does.  Everyone you see will be walking (usually quickly) somewhere very, very specific.  You, on the other hand, will be wandering aimlessly wondering whether you want the East Exit, the Southeast Exit, the New South Exit, or something else entirely.

Once you make your way out of the station, you’ll be smack in the middle of metropolitan Tokyo.  One side of the tracks is dominated by huge office buildings, the other is Kabukicho, the center of nightlife.  Along the tracks a way’s down is Shinjuku Gyoen, or Garden for you gaijin; one of the most splendid parks in the world.  In Japan, establishments are either 24H, or open at 11AM (of course there are exceptions, but they seem to be few in Tokyo). Luckily, morning is a great time to sneak into some of the more popular 24H places, most especially Ichiran Ramen.

Chances are good you’ll drop off your bags and look for something to eat.  Don’t be afraid to stay at a capsule hotel, there’s one right outside the Shinjuku south entrance which is exceptionally clean and comfortable.  If you’re only in Tokyo for the day, either for a layover or because you’re catching a train later in the day, leave your bags in a coin locker at the station, they’re super-easy and it’s way better than dragging your shit around all day.

So, you’re hungry.  Most places have plastic food and/or a picture menu outside.  The majority of places in Shinjuku will have an English menu available.  A minority go out of their way to make tourists comfortable.  In my experience, Japan is one of the few places where “ENGLISH MENU” does not equate to bad food.  They may not be the most stand-out establishments with lines around the corner, but the worst you’ll get is a standard version of your dish, not like the crap you’ll get served in Siem Riep.

Ok, you’ve eaten some food, you’re tired but you also would like a beer or two.  Japanese bars are great fun, but you’re too overwhelmed and suffering from sensory overload.  Luckily, there’s convenience stores and beer vending machines everywhere.  In fact, your hotel almost certainly has a beer vending machine readily available.  If not, if you walk around a block once, you’ll find one.  Also handy are Family Mart, Lawson, 7-11 and the other C-stores.  In Shinjuku they’re all 24H.  You can also grab a sandwich or any other food that looks good, it’ll also be OK (compared with American gas-station shit-sandwiches).  Just be prepared for lots of white bread without crusts.  And just because it looks like fried meat does not mean that’s what it is…

Now, go the fuck to sleep.  You’ve got a long trip ahead of you and Japan’s not going anywhere.